Control Flow
Boolean Expressions
5 min

To build control flow in our program, we need to be able to check whether or not a condition is true. For this, we use Boolean expressions.

A Boolean expression is a statement that can either be true or false. The statement must be answered
with
Preview: Docs Simplifies resource management by automatically handling setup and teardown actions using context managers.
true or false only, and it must be verifiable with evidence. It cannot rely on interpretation or opinion.

To understand this, let’s go back to the “waking up” example. The first question, “Is today a weekday?”, can be written as a Boolean expression shown below:

Today is a weekday.

This expression can be true — if today is Tuesday, for example — or false if it’s a weekend. There are no other alternatives. We know the answer is verifiable and does not rely on opinion.

Now, consider the following phrase:

Friday is the best day of the week.

Is this a Boolean expression?

No, this statement is an opinion and is subjective. Someone might claim that “Wednesday is the best day.” — and their statement would be no less true or false than the previous one.

How about the following phrase:

Sunday starts with the letter 'C.' 

Yes, this is a Boolean expression since the answer can only be true or false, and it is verifiable. Even though the statement itself is false (Sunday starts with the letter ‘S’ and not ‘C’), it is still a Boolean expression.
Instructions

    Checkpoint 1 Passed

    1.

    Examine the following statement.

    The Earth revolves around the Sun.

    Copy to Clipboard

    If you think it’s a Boolean expression, set the variable first_statement to "Yes". Else, set it to "No".
    Checkpoint 2 Passed

    2.

    Now, consider the following statement.

    The Moon is made of cheese.

    Copy to Clipboard

    If you think it’s a Boolean expression, create a variable second_statement and set it to "Yes". Otherwise, set it to "No".
    Checkpoint 3 Passed

    3.

    Next, consider the following statement.

    Chocolate ice cream tastes better than vanilla.

    Copy to Clipboard

    If the statement qualifies as a Boolean expression, initialize a variable third_statement to "Yes". If it doesn’t, initialize the variable third_statement to "No".
