Hello World
Numbers
8 min

Computers can understand much more than just
strings
Preview: Docs Loading link description
of text. Python has a few
numeric data types
Preview: Docs Loading link description
. It has multiple ways of storing numbers. Which one we use depends on our intended purpose for the number we are saving.

An integer, or int, is a whole number. It has no decimal point and contains all counting numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.), as well as their negative counterparts and the number 0. If we were counting the number of people in a room, the number of jellybeans in a jar, or the number of keys on a keyboard, we would likely use an integer.

A floating-point number, or a float, is a decimal number. It can be used to represent both fractional quantities and precise measurements. If we were measuring the length of a bedroom wall, calculating the average test score for a science class, or storing a baseball player’s batting average for the 1998 season, we would likely use a float.

Numbers can be assigned to
variables
Preview: Docs Loading link description
or used literally in a program:

an_int = 2
a_float = 2.1

print(an_int + 3)
# Output: 5

Copy to Clipboard

In the preceding code, we defined an integer and a float as the variables an_int and a_float. We printed out the sum of the variable an_int
with
Preview: Docs Loading link description
the number 3. We call the number 3 here a literal, meaning it’s actually the number 3 and not a variable with the number 3 assigned to it.

Floating-point numbers can behave in some unexpected ways due to how computers store them. For more information on floating-point numbers and Python, review Python’s documentation on floating-point limitations.
Instructions

    Checkpoint 1 Passed

    1.

    A recent movie-going experience has you excited to publish a review. You rush out of the cinema and hastily begin programming to create your movie-review website: “The Big Screen’s Greatest Scenes Decided By A Machine.”

    Create the following variables and assign integer numbers to them: release_year and runtime.
    Checkpoint 2 Passed

    2.

    Now, create the variable rating_out_of_10 and assign it a float number between one and ten.
