Control Flow
If Statement
8 min

“Okay, okay, okay, Boolean
variables
Preview: Docs Loading link description
, Boolean expressions, I thought we were learning how to build control flow into my code!”

We are, I promise you!

Understanding Boolean variables and expressions is essential because they are the building blocks of
conditional statements
Preview: Docs Conditionals take an expression, which is code that evaluates to determine a value, and checks if it is True or False. If it’s True, we can tell our program to do one thing — we can even account for False to do another. As we write more complex programs, conditionals allow us to address multiple scenarios and make our programs more robust. The Python if statement is used to determine the execution of code based on the evaluation of a Boolean expression. - If the if statement expression evaluates to True, then the indented code following the statement is executed. - If the expression evaluates to False then the indented code following the if statement is skipped and the program executes the next line of code which is indented at the same level as the if statement. py test_value = 100
.

Recall the waking-up example
from
Preview: Docs Loading link description
the beginning of this lesson. The decision-making process of “Is it raining? If so, bring an umbrella” is a conditional statement.

Here it is phrased in a different way:

If it is raining, then bring an umbrella.

Can you pick out the Boolean expression here?

Right, "it is raining" is the Boolean expression, and this conditional statement is checking to see if it is true.

If "it is raining" == True, then the rest of the conditional statement will be executed, and you will bring an umbrella.

This is the form of a conditional statement:

If [it is raining], then [bring an umbrella]

In Python, it looks very similar:

if is_raining:
  print("bring an umbrella")

Copy to Clipboard

We’ll notice that instead of “then” we have a colon, :. That tells the computer that what’s coming next is the code to execute if the condition is met. The code that should be executed is indented to show that it follows that condition.

Let’s take a look at another conditional statement:

if 2 == 4 - 2: 
  print("apple")

Copy to Clipboard

Will this code print apple to the terminal?

Yes, because the condition of the if statement, 2 == 4 - 2 is True.

Let’s work through a couple more together.
Instructions

    Checkpoint 1 Passed

    1.

    In script.py, there is an if statement. I wrote this because my coworker Dave kept using my computer without permission. If the user_name is "Dave", it tells him to stay off my computer.

    Enter a user name in the field for user_name and try running the program.
    Checkpoint 2 Passed

    2.

    Oh no! We got a SyntaxError! This happens when we make a small error in the syntax of the conditional statement.

    Read through the error message carefully and see if you can find the error. Then, fix it, and run the code again.
    Checkpoint 3 Passed

    3.

    Dave got around my security and has been logging onto my computer using our coworker Angela’s user name, "angela_catlady_87".

    Set your user_name to be "angela_catlady_87".

    Update the program with a second if statement that checks for Angela’s user name as well and prints the following in response:

    "I know it is you, Dave! Go away!"
